---
layout: post
title: "Ritual"
date: 2020-04-05
categories: religion
---
As one might be able to tell from the hiatus in content on this blog, I've been back to work at both jobs lately. I've also been in a funk and unable or unwilling to make progress on the projects I'm trying to describe here. When I'm at my library job, I seem to have decent ideas, but they all slip away by the time I get home. Perhaps I just don't have a great workspace at home, perhaps this speaks to something deeper about what sparks my connection to ambition/optimism about my own projects, but in any case, I'm stuck.

A running theme is this: I keep waiting on divinity to simply pluck me out of my life and into a greater world or greater purpose. In this, I model the stories I've been told of prophets and great leaders - God chose them as His tools, not the other way around. But in the real world, it seems, you have to seek out what you want, and it may be difficult to find.

One goal of this project has been to create a relevant form in which the divine can manifest to today's world. I'm still in the process of figuring out what the parameters even might be for an appropriate ritual for the above, to say nothing of attempting said. Part of the answer, I feel, is in the construction of a happy life to begin with, as a model for what might come, but I'm not currently living what I imagine my best life might be. I feel like I need partners in crime here, and that's something I'm not sure I'd be able to find even in the closest of companions. 
