---
layout: post
title: "Orders"
date: 2020-06-16
categories: religion
comments: true
---
Most religious traditions have sought to balance the spiritual paths of mystics, ascetics, and other seekers and scholars with the demands of attracting a broad base of followers in diverse societies. One method is that of religious orders - special sub-sects who adhere to codes of conduct not required of lay followers, often receiving financial support from the clergy. This has primarily worked as a tool to maintain a scholarly or specialist class. However, if we are trying to invent a religious system that allows for multiple spiritual paths and distinct deities while maintaining some measure of political unity, religious orders present an easy, if not exactly simple, way to incorporate structured diversity with a common model for support.
In existing faiths, religious orders have somewhat shrunk in influence, given the tighter budgets of modern day churches, not to mention the extent to which lay members have taken over roles formerly delegated mainly to the religious orders - evangelism, distribution of charity, scholarship, and so forth. But need that be the case? We can’t afford to maintain a specialist or artisan class no matter how much we poured into a tithe (consciously, anyway - somehow we do manage to find that money for concert tickets when need be, and I really wonder how much difference there is.) But can we support orders or working groups devoted to special projects? I think so.
