---
layout: post
title: "Altar"
date: 2020-05-31
categories: religion
comments: true
---
I don't know who I'd be apologizing to if I apologized for lack of content over the past couple months - most likely just the couple people who I already know look at this blog. Instead, here is an expansion on the religious project I've outlined in previous posts.

The central elements of religion can be broken down in many different ways, because religion is a fluid category that defies attempts to exclusively nail down what it is and isn't. However, most systems recognized as religious at some point attempt to answer the question "What should I do?" To break this down a little further, we can consider several aspects:

1. What is the world, and how should I understand my place in it?
2. How should I conduct myself with other people?
3. What, practically, should I do to flourish in life?

The more familiar and widespread religious traditions attempt to address all three of these questions to one degree or another. Some may address aspects not mentioned here, some may focus on fewer. For now, we can take it as an axiom that all three of these aspects are at least worth our time.

Much of the debate as to the continued relevance of religion in modern life focuses on the first of these questions, as it relates to modern science and its importance in answering questions about the world. While many will admit there must be a gap between is and ought, surely as more phenomena become observable, the role of science must overtake religion in answering what exactly makes the world tick. There are several problems with this assumption. Scientific methods are designed specifically to measure phenomena that are, or can be made to be, consistent and testable, and there are limits, some harder than others, on what can be made consistent and testable, within real practical and economic constraints. Particle colliders, for example, cannot increase to arbitrary sizes in the real world without drastic expense, and therefore tests about certain as-yet theoretical subatomic particles simply cannot be conducted within current human capabilities. In the social sciences, limits are theoretically easier to ascertain, but in practice the endless search for funding can cause people to overstate what their data has to say - for example, the recent so-called "replicability crisis" in psychology has overturned several assumptions that had been in textbooks (my textbooks) for years. None of this is intended to throw doubt on the actual validity of scientific processes in producing accurate findings - it is enough simply to say that as scientific methods are employed to investigate more contingent, irreproducible phenomena, such as apparent manifestations of the divine in our lives, we are likely to run up against its practical limitations. (Conversely, I'm skeptical of new age adjacent ideas that suggest science will eventually prove certain spiritual beliefs objectively correct. Quantum physics is weird, but its implications are not uniquely magical.)
